---
title: Wetting my feet in Android – Seinfeld Calendar
author: vivekragunathan
layout: post
date: 2011-03-15T18:20:04+00:00
url: /2011/03/15/seinfeld/
categories:
  - Android
  - Mobile
  - Uncategorized

---

A couple of my colleagues and I huddled up to learn a bit of Android. I think I told you about [that](/2011/03/08/anonymous-classes-vs-delegates/) a short while back. We developed a very simple application – [The Seinfeld Calendar](https://market.android.com/details?id=com.pongal.seinfeld&feature=search_result).

[Seinfeld](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Seinfeld) calendar or otherwise called the habit calendar is [Seinfeld’s productivity secret](http://lifehacker.com/#!281626/jerry-seinfelds-productivity-secret). The secret of achieving your goal is practising something, whatever your goal is, everyday and make it a habit. And mark it in your calendar each day you practice, and make sure you do not break the chain. Our application helps you keep track of your everyday tasks.

Our application does not jog or meditate or quit smoking for you. You have to do your tasks. Our application provides the facility to create tasks for the habits you wish to pursue, which in certain cases like smoking means quitting. And then you mark each day in the calendar if you pursued your task, else you don’t mark and break the chain. And no cheating!

The application is in very nascent stage and does not provide you (fancy) statistics and all. I mean if you are really serious about pursuing something to make it your habit, then you will use our application. If not, you will just be waiting for funky features and newer versions of the application. Just kidding!

All fellow android users, [download](https://market.android.com/details?id=com.pongal.seinfeld&feature=search_result) the application, give it a try and let me know how good or bad the application is. And also let me know your wishlist of features in the application.